docs: added apache-apisix-v3-preview (#1337)
iresty/iresty.github.io: blog/en/blog/2022/09/21/apache-apisix-v3-preview.md

---
title: "Apache APISIX 3.0: 10 Highlights of the Open Source API Gateway"
authors:
  - name: Ming Wen
    title: Author
    url: https://github.com/moonming

>     image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/26448043

Reviewer: Was anyone else involved in edit and/or translation? I suggest give them credit as well.

Author: Hey @yzeng25, actually this post is processed mainly by Keer and me 😅 (Grammarly of course)

With the iteration of server-side technologies, more and more services have begun to migrate from bare metal to Kubernetes, and the original monolithic architecture has gradually evolved into a microservice architecture. At the same time, enterprises have started to migrate their on-premise data centers to multi-cloud or hybrid clouds.

With these technological advancements in the environment, the requirements for API gateways at the business level have become increasingly complex.

## API Gateway Apache APISIX

When [Apache APISIX](http://github.com/apache/apisix) was born, it hoped to help enterprises solve new problems in cloud-native environments and microservices. For example, it provides autoscaling of the business traffic through the fully dynamic feature and one-time modification to more conveniently achieve cluster management.

Therefore, in the architectural design of APISIX, the data plane and the control plane are separated to achieve fully dynamic and cluster management, which is mainly accomplished by etcd components.

> ![01.png](https://static.apiseven.com/2022/09/21/632ab5bd35b73.png)

Reviewer 2: I think the picture descriptions should use a clearer description instead of just numbers

Reviewer: Yeah, I agree. Double check all image descriptions please.

But just solving these problems is not enough. As a middleware with requests from both [upstream](https://apisix.apache.org/docs/apisix/terminology/upstream/) and downstream, the API gateway plays a crucial position in the enterprise architecture as the traffic entrance and the connection between the service layers. API gateway's role differs from databases that only receive requests from the user's business level.

In addition to business-level requirements, API gateways also have requirements for customization and integration. So how to make custom development easier for developers when using APISIX is another significant pain point that APISIX solves, lowering the threshold for developers to code.

In APISIX, plugins are developed mainly through Lua, and [LuaJIT](https://apisix.apache.org/blog/2021/08/25/why-apache-apisix-chose-nginx-and-lua/) (a Just-In-Time Compiler for Lua) is used to ensure that the compiled code performance is good enough. However, as a relatively minor language, the learning cost of Lua is high for most backend engineers. To solve this problem, APISIX provides two solutions.

> ## Support more languages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Support More Programming Languages
```
<img width="1920" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/36651058/191659990-b5ba6de2-fd6b-4988-a2ef-901fee2ee054.png">

> The first solution is to support more mainstream programming languages ​​(such as [Java](https://github.com/apache/apisix-java-plugin-runner), [Python](https://github.com/apache/apisix-python-plugin-runner), Go, etc.) through [Plugin Runner](https://apisix.apache.org/docs/apisix/external-plugin/). You will know at least one of these languages if you are a backend engineer. Using Plugin Runner, backend engineers can communicate through local RPC to develop APISIX plugins using the programming languages they are familiar with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first solution is to support more widely-used programming languages ​​(such as [Java](https://github.com/apache/apisix-java-plugin-runner), [Python](https://github.com/apache/apisix-python-plugin-runner), Go, etc.) through [Plugin Runner](https://apisix.apache.org/docs/apisix/external-plugin/). You will know at least one of these languages if you are a backend engineer. Using Plugin Runner, backend engineers can communicate through local RPC to develop APISIX plugins using the programming languages they are familiar with.
```

Reviewer: There is a Go plugin blog as well, you should add the link to it, just like Python and Java.

The advantage of this is to reduce development costs and improve development efficiency. The disadvantage will be performance losses. So, is there a way to achieve the near-native performance of Lua using high-level languages that developers are familiar with?

![02.png](https://static.apiseven.com/2022/09/21/632ab5bddbb29.png)

## Support WASM

The second solution is to use Wasm to develop plugins, as shown in the left part of the above figure. Wasm (WebAssembly) was first used as a new type of technology that runs in browsers, but now it is also gradually showing its advantages on the server side.

We embedded [Wasm](https://apisix.apache.org/docs/apisix/wasm/) into APISIX, and users can use Wasm to compile Wasm bytecode to run in APISIX. Furthermore, to use Wasm, we developed a Wasm plugin where users can establish near-native APISIX plugins using high-level programming languages.

As a result, users can use Lua, Go, Python, Wasm, etc., to write custom plugins on APISIX. Furthermore, making development easy opens doors for APISIX plugin development.

> Thanks to APISIX's architecture and performance upper hand, APISIX's global user growth has far exceeded expectations in the three years since its inception. For example, big Chinese tech companies such as [WPS](https://apisix.apache.org/blog/2021/09/28/wps-usercase/), [Sina Weibo](https://apisix.apache.org/blog/2021/07/06/the-road-to-customization-of-sina-weibo-api-gateway-based-on-apache-apisix/), and [iQiyi](https://apisix.apache.org/blog/2021/09/07/iqiyi-usercase/) are enterprise-level users carrying tens of billions of API requests daily. In addition, there are also many users in the field of scientific research institutions such as NASA and European Factory Platformwho are using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to APISIX's architecture and performance upper hand, APISIX's global user growth has far exceeded expectations in the three years since its inception. For example, big Chinese tech companies such as [WPS](https://apisix.apache.org/blog/2021/09/28/wps-usercase/), [Sina Weibo](https://apisix.apache.org/blog/2021/07/06/the-road-to-customization-of-sina-weibo-api-gateway-based-on-apache-apisix/), and [iQiyi](https://apisix.apache.org/blog/2021/09/07/iqiyi-usercase/) are enterprise-level users carrying tens of billions of API requests daily. In addition, scientific research institutions such as NASA and European Factory Platform, are using APISIX.
```

## 10 New Highlights of APISIX 3.0

APISIX proposed a new [3.0 Roadmap](https://github.com/apache/apisix/issues/6473) in early 2022. In version 3.0, its iterations and updates will focus on usability and the ecosystem.

![03.png](https://static.apiseven.com/2022/09/22/632bd6f95717a.png)

> APISIX plans to launch beta version 3.0 at the end of September. Here, we have selected the following ten eye-catching features to give a brief introduction before the official release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APISIX plans to launch beta version 3.0 by the end of September. Here, we have selected the following ten eye-catching features to give a brief introduction before the official release.
```

In this case, the APISIX Ingress can be configured using the Gateway API, which means you can switch between different data planes. By the end of this year, APISIX Ingress will have complete support for the Gateway API and additional transport and application layer features.

Unlike most service mesh solutions, APISIX's service mesh solution has advantages in the data plane (due to the high performance of APISIX itself). So, in selecting the control plane, we hope it will be compatible with some mainstream solutions in the community. Finally, by using the xDS protocol to integrate with Istio and writing the obtained configuration to the xDS configuration center of APISIX, the specific routing rules are generated by APISIX to complete the corresponding routing requests.

This solution not only makes the entire service mesh lighter but also makes custom development and migration more convenient with the high scalability of APISIX.

> ### Integrate More Ecosystems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Integrate with More Ecosystems
```
